README.md, before:

Map of American Rivers
======================

## A vector tile demonstration and tutorial

By [Nelson Minar](http://www.somebits.com/) <tt>&lt;[nelson@monkey.org](mailto:nelson@monkey.org)&gt;</tt><br>
May 2013<br>
See the [live map](http://www.somebits.com/~nelson/tmp/rivers/)
and [the source code](https://github.com/NelsonMinar/vector-river-map).

<div style="background-color: #ffd"><b>Prerelease version</b>, not yet complete.</div>

<a href="http://www.somebits.com/~nelson/tmp/rivers/rivers-leaflet.html#9/38.4385/-121.1270"><img src="https://raw.github.com/NelsonMinar/vector-river-map/master/sample.jpg" alt="sample map"></a>

Many thanks to
[Mike Bostock](http://bost.ocks.org/mike/),
[Seth Fitzsimmons](https://github.com/mojodna),
[Mike Migurski](http://mike.teczno.com/),
and [Bobby Sudekum](http://visuallybs.com/)
for feedback and help.


## Introduction

This project contains everything you need from start to finish to make a
vector based web map of American rivers. This demonstration map is neither
particularly beautiful nor complex, but it is a complete example of how
to build a web map using tiled vector data into a web map. The source code is
open source you are encouraged to read and tinker with.
The components integrated in this project are:

1. [NHDPlus](http://www.horizon-systems.com/nhdplus/), the source data for river flowlines.
2. [PostGIS](http://postgis.refractions.net/), a geographic database.
3. [TileStache](http://tilestache.org/), a vector tile [GeoJSON](http://www.geojson.org/) server.
4. [Gunicorn](http://gunicorn.org/), a Python web server container.
5. [Leaflet](http://leafletjs.com/) and [Polymaps](http://polymaps.org/), two Javascript libraries
for rendering maps.

It's a lot of pieces, but each one is pretty simple by itself. Combined
together they form a powerful open source mapping stack for
serving vector data to web browsers. You're welcome to [see the map running
live](http://www.somebits.com/~nelson/tmp/rivers/) on my server, but the real
point of this project is to show developers all the pieces necessary to build
their own map using vector tiles. Read on for details of how the map is
constructed, and be sure to
[check out the source code](https://github.com/NelsonMinar/vector-river-map);
lots of comments and a focus on readability. There are also some very
detailed development notes on
[my work journal](http://nelsonslog.wordpress.com/category/vector-rivers/).

For client authors, the vector tiles are available as a service with
the URL pattern
`http://somebits.com:8000/mergedRivers/{z}/{x}/{y}.json`.
Light use only please; the server is not provisioned for real traffic.

## Quick start

* Install <a href="#server-prerequisites">required software</a>.
* Run `downloadNhd.sh` to get data.
* Run `importNhd.sh` to bring data into PostGIS.
* Run `serve.sh` to start TileStache in Gunicorn.
* Load http://localhost:8000/riverst/13/1316/3169.json to verify GeoJSON tiles are being served.
* Run `serverTest.py` to do a quick test on the server.
* Load `rivers-leaflet.html` or `rivers-polymaps.html` to view the map.

## About vector tiles

Vector tiles are an exciting, underutilized idea to make flexible and
efficient web apps. Google Maps revolutioned online cartography by
popularizing the use of [map tiles](http://www.maptiler.org/google-maps-
coordinates-tile-bounds-projection/) to serve "slippy maps" with excellent
quality and interactivity. Most slippy maps are raster maps, essentially a
mosaïc of PNG or JPG images. But a lot of geographic data is
intrinsically vector oriented, lines and polygons. Pre-rendering geodata into raster
image tiles is a common approach. But serving data as vectors
that are then rendered in the user's browser can result in maps that are faster,
smaller, and more flexible.

Vector tiles are starting to catch on in proprietary applications; for
instance most mobile maps are now rendered with vector data for a more
efficient, more beautiful rendering. Vector
mapping in the open source world is still a bit obscure. There are several
open source vector renderers: the
[Polymaps](http://polymaps.org/) Javascript library was an early pioneer,
[MapsForge](https://code.google.com/p/mapsforge/) is a nice open source
vector renderer for Android, and
[MapBox 2](http://mapbox.com/blog/vector-tiles/) is based on
a vector tile stack. Serving vector tiles has been less common, but
is starting to become easier. This tutorial relies on [TileStache's VecTiles
provider](http://tilestache.org/doc/TileStache.Goodies.VecTiles.html) to
serve our own prepared geodata.
[OpenStreetMap is also experimenting](http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Vector_tiles)
with serving vector tiles of its data and you can see various experimental
OSM vector clients like [Ziggy Jonsson's](http://bl.ocks.org/ZJONSSON/5529395)
and [Mike Bostock's](http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/5593150).

Tiling isn't necessary for all vector data. For example, the demonstration map
contains the US state boundaries as a single 88k GeoJSON file. If the full
dataset is small it is reasonable to serve an entire vector geometry as a
single file and let the client renderer take care of clipping. That works fine
for 100kB of data but is impractical with 10+MB of geometry. Cropping to tiles
optimizes sending only visible geometry. Scaling tiles enables data to be
simplified and down-sampled to match pixel visibility.

Vector tiles are ultimately quite simple. Consider [this tile near near
Oakland](http://somebits.com:8000/mergedRivers/13/1316/3169.json).
The [URL naming system](http://www.maptiler.org/google-maps-coordinates-tile-bounds-projection/)
is exactly like Google's convention for raster map tiles:
this tile is at z=13, x=1316, y=3169.
Only instead of serving a PNG image the URL results in a
[GeoJSON file](http://www.geojson.org/) describing the geometry inside the
tile's bounding box. This example tile has 3 features in it; one for
San Lorenzo Creek, one for Sulphur Creek, and one for two other unnamed
flows in the tile.
Each feature contains a geometry, a name, a
[HUC code](http://water.usgs.gov/GIS/huc.html) naming the watershed,
and a [Strahler number](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strahler_Stream_Order)
characterizing the river's significance.

The tricky thing about vector
tiles is what to do about features that cross tiles. In this tutorial we clip
the geometry to the tile boundary and rely on the overlapping lines being
drawn to make a seamless map. It's also possible to not clip, which results in
redundant data but keeps features intact. A third option can be to clip geometry
and re-unify it on the client before rendering.

## Server prerequisites

The following is a partial list of software you need installed on your Unix
system to generate and serve these maps. (Sorry Windows users, Unix is a
better choice for this kind of work.) I've tested with both MacOS and Ubuntu.
On the Mac, most prerequisites are available via
[Homebrew](http://mxcl.github.io/homebrew/); see also this
[guide to open source geo on the Mac](https://github.com/nvkelso/geo-how-to/wiki/Installing-Open-Source-Geo-Software:-Mac-Edition).
On Ubuntu most software is available via
`apt-get`, although the more recent versions from the [UbuntuGIS
PPA](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/UbuntuGIS) are recommended. Other Linux
distributions can probably install the required software via their native
package system. If the code is available on
[PyPI](https://pypi.python.org/pypi) I prefer to install Python code with
[`pip`](http://www.pip- installer.org/en/latest/) rather than rely on the Mac
or Ubuntu package versions.

* [curl](http://curl.haxx.se/) for downloading NHDPlus data from the web.
* [p7zip](http://p7zip.sourceforge.net/) for unpacking NHDPlus data. Ubuntu users be sure to install `p7zip-full`.
* [PostgreSQL](http://www.postgresql.org/) and [PostGIS](http://postgis.refractions.net/) for a geospatial database.
PostgreSQL 9.1 or later and PostGIS 2 are recommended for ease of installing the PostGIS extension.
* [psycopg2](http://initd.org/psycopg/) for talking to Postgres from Python.
* shp2pgsql, part of PostGIS, for importing ESRI shapefiles into PostGIS
* [pgdbf](https://github.com/kstrauser/pgdbf) for importing DBF databases into PostgreSQL. Unfortunately the Ubuntu/precise
version 0.5.5 does not have the `-s` flag needed for handling non-ASCII data. Install from
[sources](http://sourceforge.net/projects/pgdbf/files/pgdbf/) or ensure you're
getting version 0.6.* from somewhere.
* [Gunicorn](http://gunicorn.org/) for a Python web app server.
* [TileStache](http://tilestache.org/) for the Python web app that serves map tiles. TileStache has
an undocumented dependency on [Shapely](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Shapely)
that you can install via `pip`.
* [requests](http://docs.python-requests.org/en/latest/) and
[grequests](https://github.com/kennethreitz/grequests) for `serverTest.py`, a Python HTTP client test.
* [gdal](http://www.gdal.org/) is the low level library for open source geo.
It will be installed as dependencies by the tools above; listed
separately out of respect for how essential it is.


## Project components

This project consists of several short scripts and configuration files to
glue together the software components. There is precious little programming
logic here, most of it is integration.

* `downloadNhd.sh` downloads data from [NHDPlus](http://www.horizon-
systems.com/nhdplus/), a nice repository of cleaned up National Hydrographic
Data distributed as ESRI shapefiles. This shell script takes care of
downloading the files and then extracting the specific data files we're
interested in. NHDPlus is a fantastic resource if you're interested in mapping
water in the United States. Note by default the script only downloads data
for California; edit the script if you want the entire US.

* `importNhd.sh` imports the NHDPlus data into PostGIS and
prepares it for serving. This script borrows ideas from [Seth Fitzsimmons'
NHD importer](https://gist.github.com/mojodna/b1f169b33db907f2b8dd). Note that
detailed output is logged to a file named `/tmp/nhd.log.*`, see the first line
of script output for details. The steps this script takes are:<ol><li>Create a database named `rivers`
<li>Import NHDFlowline shapefiles into a table named `nhdflowline`
<li>Import PlusFlowlineVAA DBF files into a table named `plusflowlinevaa`
<li>Run `processNhd.sql` to create a table named `rivers`
<li>Run `mergeRivers.py` to create a table named `merged_rivers`
</ol>

* `processNhd.sql` prepares the imported data to a format more tailored
to our needs. It makes a new table named `rivers` which joins
the geometry from NHDFlowline with metadata such as river name,
[reach code](http://nhd.usgs.gov/nhd_faq.html#q119), and
[Strahler number](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strahler_number) from
PlusFlowlineVAA. It has about 2.7 million rows for the whole US.

* `mergeRivers.py` optimizes the data by merging geometry. NHD data
has many tiny little rows for a single river. For efficiency
we merge geometries based on river ID and the
HUC8 portion of the reach code. The resulting `merged_rivers` table
has about 330,000 rows.
This step is not strictly necessary &mdash; TileStache can serve the geometry
in the `rivers` table directly. But the resulting GeoJSON is large and slow,
merging each river into a single LineString or MultiLineString results in
vector tiles roughly one tenth the size and time to process.

* `serve.sh` is a simple shell script to invoke Gunicorn and the TileStache
webapp. In a real production deployment this should be replaced with a server
management framework. (It's also possible to serve TileStache via CGI, but
it's terribly slow.)

* `gunicorn.cfg.py` is the Gunicorn server configuration. There's very little
here in this example, Gunicorn has [many configuration
options](http://docs.gunicorn.org/en/latest/configure.html).

* `tilestache.cfg` sets up TileStache to serve a single layer named `rivers`
from the `merged_rivers` table, backed by a cache in `/tmp/stache`.
It uses the [VecTiles
provider](http://tilestache.org/doc/TileStache.Goodies.VecTiles.html), the
magic in TileStache that takes care of doing PostGIS queries and preparing
nicely cropped GeoJSON tiles. At this layer we start making significant
cartographic decisions.

* `serverTest.py` is a simple Python client test that inspects a few
vector tiles for basic correctness and reports load times. `slowTiles.py`
is another simple test client for timing a few particularly slow
tiles for the larger US data set.

* `rivers-leaflet.html` and `rivers-polymaps.html` are two alternate
Javascript map renderers. [Leaflet](http://leafletjs.com/) is an actively
maintained excellent Javascript map library; vector tile support is provided
by Glen Robertson's [leaflet-tilelayer-geojson
plugin](https://github.com/glenrobertson/leaflet-tilelayer-geojson).
[Polymaps](http://polymaps.org/) is an older Javascript map library that is no
longer actively maintained. Polymaps pioneered the vector tile idea and
renders vector maps very efficiently.

## Cartographic decisions

Most of the work in this project is plumbing, systems programming
we have to do to make the engines go. The demonstration map is deliberately
quite simple and unsophisticated. Even so, it contains a few
decisions requiring the map maker's art.

Most of the actual cartography is being done in Javascript, in the Leaflet and
Polymaps drawing scripts. This tutorial code does very little, mostly just drawing
blue lines in varying thicknesses. In addition
the Leaflet version has a simple popup when rivers are clicked. With the
actual vector geometry and metadata available in Javascript a lot more could
be done in the presentation; highlighting rivers, interactive filtering by
Strahler number, combination with other vector data sources, etc.

Some cartographic decisions are made on the server side. The TileStache
VecTiles configuration contains an array of queries that return results at
different zoom levels. At high zoom levels (say z=4) we only return rivers
which are relatively big, those with a [Strahler
number](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strahler_number) of 6 or higher. At finer
grained zoom levels we return more and smaller rivers. This per-zoom filtering
both limits the bandwidth used on large scale maps and prevents the display
from being overcluttered. Rendering zillions of tiny streams
can be [quite beautiful](http://nelsonslog.wordpress.com/2013/04/19
/california-rivers/), but also resource intensive.

VecTiles also simplifies the
geometry, serving only the precision needed at the zoom level. You can
see this in action if you watch it re-render as you navigate; rivers will
start to grow more bends and detail as you zoom in. TileStache does that for
us automatically.



## Project ideas


The map provided here is a simple tutorial demonstration. To make
this a better map, some possible directions:

* More beautiful river rendering. The rivers here are drawn as simple blue
lines with a static thickness based on the river's Strahler number, a
topological measure of its distance from headwaters. It'd be better to vary
thickness also based on the map's zoom level, or maybe change the color too,
or bring in extra information on river size such as flow rate or average
channel width.

* More thematic data. The ESRI relief tiles are a nice base map because they show the
natural relationship between terrain and river flow, but it's pretty minimal.
Why not add some ponds and lakes, or ground cover coloring,
or cities and major roads?

* Use a better HTTP server. Gunicorn is designed to run behind a proxy like
Nginx or Apache. Not only does a proxy handle slow clients better, it can
serve appropriate caching headers and gzip the JSON output.

* More efficient vector tiles. The code here downloads a new set of tiles for
every zoom level. But that's needlessly redundant; it's feasible to only
download new tiles every few zoom levels and trade off pixel-perfect accuracy
for smaller bandwidth.

* Convert to TopoJSON for smaller encoding. Even without shared topology
[TopoJSON](https://github.com/mbostock/topojson)
encoding can be significantly smaller than equivalent GeoJSON.

## Conclusion

The [vector river map](https://github.com/NelsonMinar/vector-river-map)
lays out all the components required to make an open source
vector map, from downloading the data to preparing it in a database
to serving tiles on the Web to rendering those tiles in the browser. If
this tutorial was helpful to you or you have any suggestions or questions,
please feel free to email the author at
[<tt>nelson@monkey.org</tt>](mailto:nelson@monkey.org). I'm looking forward
to seeing what others are inspired to do!

Commit message:

Rename things for final API Unabbreviated property names in GeoJSON Serve a single merged vector layer under URL /rivers/

README.md, after:

Map of American Rivers
======================

## A vector tile demonstration and tutorial

By [Nelson Minar](http://www.somebits.com/) <tt>&lt;[nelson@monkey.org](mailto:nelson@monkey.org)&gt;</tt><br>
May 2013<br>
See the [live map](http://www.somebits.com/~nelson/tmp/rivers/)
and [the source code](https://github.com/NelsonMinar/vector-river-map).

<div style="background-color: #ffd"><b>Prerelease version</b>, not yet complete.</div>

<a href="http://www.somebits.com/~nelson/tmp/rivers/rivers-leaflet.html#9/38.4385/-121.1270"><img src="https://raw.github.com/NelsonMinar/vector-river-map/master/sample.jpg" alt="sample map"></a>

Many thanks to
[Mike Bostock](http://bost.ocks.org/mike/),
[Seth Fitzsimmons](https://github.com/mojodna),
[Mike Migurski](http://mike.teczno.com/),
and [Bobby Sudekum](http://visuallybs.com/)
for feedback and help.


## Introduction

This project contains everything you need from start to finish to make a
vector based web map of American rivers. This demonstration map is neither
particularly beautiful nor complex, but it is a complete example of how
to build a web map using tiled vector data into a web map. The source code is
open source you are encouraged to read and tinker with.
The components integrated in this project are:

1. [NHDPlus](http://www.horizon-systems.com/nhdplus/), the source data for river flowlines.
2. [PostGIS](http://postgis.refractions.net/), a geographic database.
3. [TileStache](http://tilestache.org/), a vector tile [GeoJSON](http://www.geojson.org/) server.
4. [Gunicorn](http://gunicorn.org/), a Python web server container.
5. [Leaflet](http://leafletjs.com/) and [Polymaps](http://polymaps.org/), two Javascript libraries
for rendering maps.

It's a lot of pieces, but each one is pretty simple by itself. Combined
together they form a powerful open source mapping stack for
serving vector data to web browsers. You're welcome to [see the map running
live](http://www.somebits.com/~nelson/tmp/rivers/) on my server, but the real
point of this project is to show developers all the pieces necessary to build
their own map using vector tiles. Read on for details of how the map is
constructed, and be sure to
[check out the source code](https://github.com/NelsonMinar/vector-river-map);
lots of comments and a focus on readability. There are also some very
detailed development notes on
[my work journal](http://nelsonslog.wordpress.com/category/vector-rivers/).

For client authors, the vector tiles are available as a service with
the URL pattern
`http://somebits.com:8000/rivers/{z}/{x}/{y}.json`.
Light use only please; the server is not provisioned for real traffic.

## Quick start

* Install <a href="#server-prerequisites">required software</a>.
* Run `downloadNhd.sh` to get data.
* Run `importNhd.sh` to bring data into PostGIS.
* Run `serve.sh` to start TileStache in Gunicorn at [http://localhost:8000/](http://localhost:8000/).
* Load [a sample tile on localhost](http://localhost:8000/rivers/13/1316/3169.json)
to verify GeoJSON tiles are being served.
* Run `serverTest.py` to do a quick test on the server.
* Load `rivers-leaflet.html` or `rivers-polymaps.html` to view the map.

## About vector tiles

Vector tiles are an exciting, underutilized idea to make flexible and
efficient web apps. Google Maps revolutioned online cartography by
popularizing the use of [map tiles](http://www.maptiler.org/google-maps-
coordinates-tile-bounds-projection/) to serve "slippy maps" with excellent
quality and interactivity. Most slippy maps are raster maps, essentially a
mosaïc of PNG or JPG images. But a lot of geographic data is
intrinsically vector oriented, lines and polygons. Pre-rendering geodata into raster
image tiles is a common approach. But serving data as vectors
that are then rendered in the user's browser can result in maps that are faster,
smaller, and more flexible.

Vector tiles are starting to catch on in proprietary applications; for
instance most mobile maps are now rendered with vector data for a more
efficient, more beautiful rendering. Vector
mapping in the open source world is still a bit obscure. There are several
open source vector renderers: the
[Polymaps](http://polymaps.org/) Javascript library was an early pioneer,
[MapsForge](https://code.google.com/p/mapsforge/) is a nice open source
vector renderer for Android, and
[MapBox 2](http://mapbox.com/blog/vector-tiles/) is based on
a vector tile stack. Serving vector tiles has been less common, but
is starting to become easier. This tutorial relies on [TileStache's VecTiles
provider](http://tilestache.org/doc/TileStache.Goodies.VecTiles.html) to
serve our own prepared geodata.
[OpenStreetMap is also experimenting](http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Vector_tiles)
with serving vector tiles of its data and you can see various experimental
OSM vector clients like [Ziggy Jonsson's](http://bl.ocks.org/ZJONSSON/5529395)
and [Mike Bostock's](http://bl.ocks.org/mbostock/5593150).

Tiling isn't necessary for all vector data. For example, the demonstration map
contains the US state boundaries as a single 88k GeoJSON file. If the full
dataset is small it is reasonable to serve an entire vector geometry as a
single file and let the client renderer take care of clipping. That works fine
for 100kB of data but is impractical with 10+MB of geometry. Cropping to tiles
optimizes sending only visible geometry. Scaling tiles enables data to be
simplified and down-sampled to match pixel visibility.

Vector tiles are ultimately quite simple. Consider [this tile near near
Oakland](http://somebits.com:8000/rivers/13/1316/3169.json)
(cached copy in [sample-13-1316-3169.json.txt]()).
The [URL naming system](http://www.maptiler.org/google-maps-coordinates-tile-bounds-projection/)
is exactly like Google's convention for raster map tiles:
this tile is at z=13, x=1316, y=3169.
Only instead of serving a PNG image the URL results in a
[GeoJSON file](http://www.geojson.org/) describing the geometry inside the
tile's bounding box. This example tile has 3 features in it; one for
San Lorenzo Creek, one for Sulphur Creek, and one for two other unnamed
flows in the tile.
Each feature contains a geometry, a name, a
[HUC code](http://water.usgs.gov/GIS/huc.html) naming the watershed,
and a [Strahler number](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strahler_Stream_Order)
characterizing the river's significance.

The tricky thing about vector
tiles is what to do about features that cross tiles. In this tutorial we clip
the geometry to the tile boundary and rely on the overlapping lines being
drawn to make a seamless map. It's also possible to not clip, which results in
redundant data but keeps features intact. A third option can be to clip geometry
and re-unify it on the client before rendering.

## Server prerequisites

The following is a partial list of software you need installed on your Unix
system to generate and serve these maps. (Sorry Windows users, Unix is a
better choice for this kind of work.) I've tested with both MacOS and Ubuntu.
On the Mac, most prerequisites are available via
[Homebrew](http://mxcl.github.io/homebrew/); see also this
[guide to open source geo on the Mac](https://github.com/nvkelso/geo-how-to/wiki/Installing-Open-Source-Geo-Software:-Mac-Edition).
On Ubuntu most software is available via
`apt-get`, although the more recent versions from the [UbuntuGIS
PPA](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/UbuntuGIS) are recommended. Other Linux
distributions can probably install the required software via their native
package system. If the code is available on
[PyPI](https://pypi.python.org/pypi) I prefer to install Python code with
[`pip`](http://www.pip- installer.org/en/latest/) rather than rely on the Mac
or Ubuntu package versions.

* [curl](http://curl.haxx.se/) for downloading NHDPlus data from the web.
* [p7zip](http://p7zip.sourceforge.net/) for unpacking NHDPlus data. Ubuntu users be sure to install `p7zip-full`.
* [PostgreSQL](http://www.postgresql.org/) and [PostGIS](http://postgis.refractions.net/) for a geospatial database.
PostgreSQL 9.1 or later and PostGIS 2 are recommended for ease of installing the PostGIS extension.
* [psycopg2](http://initd.org/psycopg/) for talking to Postgres from Python.
* shp2pgsql, part of PostGIS, for importing ESRI shapefiles into PostGIS
* [pgdbf](https://github.com/kstrauser/pgdbf) for importing DBF databases into PostgreSQL. Unfortunately the Ubuntu/precise
version 0.5.5 does not have the `-s` flag needed for handling non-ASCII data. Install from
[sources](http://sourceforge.net/projects/pgdbf/files/pgdbf/) or ensure you're
getting version 0.6.* from somewhere.
* [Gunicorn](http://gunicorn.org/) for a Python web app server.
* [TileStache](http://tilestache.org/) for the Python web app that serves map tiles. TileStache has
an undocumented dependency on [Shapely](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/Shapely)
that you can install via `pip`.
* [requests](http://docs.python-requests.org/en/latest/) and
[grequests](https://github.com/kennethreitz/grequests) for `serverTest.py`, a Python HTTP client test.
* [gdal](http://www.gdal.org/) is the low level library for open source geo.
It will be installed as dependencies by the tools above; listed
separately out of respect for how essential it is.


## Project components

This project consists of several short scripts and configuration files to
glue together the software components. There is precious little programming
logic here, most of it is integration.

* `downloadNhd.sh` downloads data from [NHDPlus](http://www.horizon-
systems.com/nhdplus/), a nice repository of cleaned up National Hydrographic
Data distributed as ESRI shapefiles. This shell script takes care of
downloading the files and then extracting the specific data files we're
interested in. NHDPlus is a fantastic resource if you're interested in mapping
water in the United States. Note by default the script only downloads data
for California; edit the script if you want the entire US.

* `importNhd.sh` imports the NHDPlus data into PostGIS and
prepares it for serving. This script borrows ideas from [Seth Fitzsimmons'
NHD importer](https://gist.github.com/mojodna/b1f169b33db907f2b8dd). Note that
detailed output is logged to a file named `/tmp/nhd.log.*`, see the first line
of script output for details. The steps this script takes are:<ol><li>Create a database named `rivers`
<li>Import NHDFlowline shapefiles into a table named `nhdflowline`
<li>Import PlusFlowlineVAA DBF files into a table named `plusflowlinevaa`
<li>Run `processNhd.sql` to create a table named `rivers`
<li>Run `mergeRivers.py` to create a table named `merged_rivers`
</ol>

* `processNhd.sql` prepares the imported data to a format more tailored
to our needs. It makes a new table named `rivers` which joins
the geometry from NHDFlowline with metadata such as river name,
[reach code](http://nhd.usgs.gov/nhd_faq.html#q119), and
[Strahler number](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strahler_number) from
PlusFlowlineVAA. It has about 2.7 million rows for the whole US.

* `mergeRivers.py` optimizes the data by merging geometry. NHD data
has many tiny little rows for a single river. For efficiency
we merge geometries based on river ID and the
HUC8 portion of the reach code. The resulting `merged_rivers` table
has about 330,000 rows.
This step is not strictly necessary &mdash; TileStache can serve the geometry
in the `rivers` table directly. But the resulting GeoJSON is large and slow,
merging each river into a single LineString or MultiLineString results in
vector tiles roughly one tenth the size and time to process.

* `serve.sh` is a simple shell script to invoke Gunicorn and the TileStache
webapp and serve it at [http://localhost:8000/](http://localhost:8000/).
In a real production deployment this should be replaced with a server
management framework. (It's also possible to serve TileStache via CGI, but
it's terribly slow.)

* `gunicorn.cfg.py` is the Gunicorn server configuration. There's very little
here in this example, Gunicorn has [many configuration
options](http://docs.gunicorn.org/en/latest/configure.html).

* `tilestache.cfg` sets up TileStache to serve a single layer named `rivers`
from the `merged_rivers` table, backed by a cache in `/tmp/stache`.
It uses the [VecTiles
provider](http://tilestache.org/doc/TileStache.Goodies.VecTiles.html), the
magic in TileStache that takes care of doing PostGIS queries and preparing
nicely cropped GeoJSON tiles. At this layer we start making significant
cartographic decisions.

* `serverTest.py` is a simple Python client test that inspects a few
vector tiles for basic correctness and reports load times. `slowTiles.py`
is another simple test client for timing a few particularly slow
tiles for the larger US data set.

* `rivers-leaflet.html` and `rivers-polymaps.html` are two alternate
Javascript map renderers. They load vector tiles from URLs like
`http://localhost:8000/rivers/{z}/{x}/{y}.json` and render them. Each also
loads a couple of other map layers for context: a
[shaded relief map from ESRI](http://www.arcgis.com/home/item.html?id=9c5370d0b54f4de1b48a3792d7377ff2)
and vector outlines of US states. [Leaflet](http://leafletjs.com/) is an actively
maintained excellent Javascript map library; vector tile support is provided
by Glen Robertson's [leaflet-tilelayer-geojson
plugin](https://github.com/glenrobertson/leaflet-tilelayer-geojson).
[Polymaps](http://polymaps.org/) is an older Javascript map library that is no
longer actively maintained. Polymaps pioneered the vector tile idea and
renders vector maps very efficiently.

## Cartographic decisions

Most of the work in this project is plumbing, systems programming
we have to do to make the engines go. The demonstration map is deliberately
quite simple and unsophisticated. Even so, it contains a few
decisions requiring the map maker's art.

Most of the actual cartography is being done in Javascript, in the Leaflet and
Polymaps drawing scripts. This tutorial code does very little, mostly just drawing
blue lines in varying thicknesses. In addition
the Leaflet version has a simple popup when rivers are clicked. With the
actual vector geometry and metadata available in Javascript a lot more could
be done in the presentation; highlighting rivers, interactive filtering by
Strahler number, combination with other vector data sources, etc.

Some cartographic decisions are made on the server side. The TileStache
VecTiles configuration contains an array of queries that return results at
different zoom levels. At high zoom levels (say z=4) we only return rivers
which are relatively big, those with a [Strahler
number](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strahler_number) of 6 or higher. At finer
grained zoom levels we return more and smaller rivers. This per-zoom filtering
both limits the bandwidth used on large scale maps and prevents the display
from being overcluttered. Rendering zillions of tiny streams
can be [quite beautiful](http://nelsonslog.wordpress.com/2013/04/19
/california-rivers/), but also resource intensive.

VecTiles also simplifies the
geometry, serving only the precision needed at the zoom level. You can
see this in action if you watch it re-render as you navigate; rivers will
start to grow more bends and detail as you zoom in. TileStache does that for
us automatically.



## Project ideas


The map provided here is a simple tutorial demonstration. To make
this a better map, some possible directions:

* More beautiful river rendering. The rivers here are drawn as simple blue
lines with a static thickness based on the river's Strahler number, a
topological measure of its distance from headwaters. It'd be better to vary
thickness also based on the map's zoom level, or maybe change the color too,
or bring in extra information on river size such as flow rate or average
channel width.

* More thematic data. The ESRI relief tiles are a nice base map because they show the
natural relationship between terrain and river flow, but it's pretty minimal.
Why not add some ponds and lakes, or ground cover coloring,
or cities and major roads?

* Use a better HTTP server. Gunicorn is designed to run behind a proxy like
Nginx or Apache. Not only does a proxy handle slow clients better, it can
serve appropriate caching headers and gzip the JSON output.

* More efficient vector tiles. The code here downloads a new set of tiles for
every zoom level. But that's needlessly redundant; it's feasible to only
download new tiles every few zoom levels and trade off pixel-perfect accuracy
for smaller bandwidth.

* Convert to TopoJSON for smaller encoding. Even without shared topology
[TopoJSON](https://github.com/mbostock/topojson)
encoding can be significantly smaller than equivalent GeoJSON.

## Conclusion

The [vector river map](https://github.com/NelsonMinar/vector-river-map)
lays out all the components required to make an open source
vector map, from downloading the data to preparing it in a database
to serving tiles on the Web to rendering those tiles in the browser. If
this tutorial was helpful to you or you have any suggestions or questions,
please feel free to email the author at
[<tt>nelson@monkey.org</tt>](mailto:nelson@monkey.org). I'm looking forward
to seeing what others are inspired to do!
